# Introduction

[//]: # (Quote about the definition and benefits of discrete mathematics)

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-discrete-structures.md"

When software engineers design and implement computer programs, they use, for
instance, higher-order, lambda, and generating functions to create and
manipulation of discrete structures (e.g., numbers, lists, and dictionaries)
that have distinct values. When engineers describe a discrete structure using
formal mathematical notation, it better enables them to see both the trade-offs
in the structure's design and implementation and the connection between one
structure and another. As pointed out by the [The Art of Problem
Solving](https://artofproblemsolving.com/) team in the article [*Why Discrete
Mathematics is
Important*](https://artofproblemsolving.com/news/articles/discrete-math), "the
mathematics of modern computer science is built almost entirely on discrete
mathematics." This course will give you a foundation in both programming and
discrete mathematics!

In the context of Python programming, this course teaches you how to use
**functions** and the **discrete structures** that form their input and output.
Leveraging this knowledge of discrete structures and functions, you will learn
how to read and translate concepts expressed in **natural language**, **formal
mathematical notation**, and **Python programs**. Positioning you for successful
work in both theoretical and practical computer science projects, this course
imparts to a learner an applied understanding of topics like **Boolean logic**,
**set theory**, and **probability theory**. You will combine your knowledge of
the aforementioned topics as you specify, design, document, implement, and test
Python programs that employ the best practices for **efficiency**,
**correctness**, and **understandability**.

*Let's first proactively explore the learning objectives for a course in
discrete structures!*
