# Introduction

[//]: # (Quote about the definition and benefits of abstraction)

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-data-abstraction.md"

In the book called [*A Philosophy of Software
Design*](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/book.php), [John
Ousterhout](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/home.php) defines an
abstraction as "a simplified view of an entity, which omits important details.
Abstractions are useful because they make it easier for us to think about and
manipulate complex things." Abstraction is a powerful tool that enables software
engineers to solve complex problems. The Data Abstraction course will teach you
how to effectively use several different types of abstractions as you solve
problems and build software!

First, you will learn about the **programming abstractions** (e.g., iteration,
recursion, and functions) that are the basic building blocks of computer
programs. Second, you will explore the abstractions in **object-oriented
programming** (e.g., inheritance, encapsulation, and polymorphism) that enable
software engineers to create and maintain large-scale systems. Using the two
previous types of abstractions, you will learn how to create and use
abstractions like **data structures** (e.g., lists and dictionaries) and
**algorithms** (e.g., searching and sorting) as you form the reliable building
blocks of complex programs. Finally, you will use **performance evaluation**
abstractions (e.g., worst-case time complexity and doubling experiments) to
study the efficiency of all the other data abstractions. Let's learn more about
how to confidently create complex software!

*We should first proactively explore the learning objectives for a course in
data abstraction!*
