# Introduction

[//]: # (Quote from Durant about habits)

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-skills.md"

[//]: # (Transition to the next section about the proactive skills)

Have you ever heard to quote "We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is
not an act but a habit."? While many people often attribute this quote to
Aristotle, it was actually written by [Will
Durant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Will_Durant) in [*The Story of
Philosophy*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Story_of_Philosophy)! Before you
start working on the projects featured on this site, it is a good idea to pause
to reflect on the proactive skills that you need to internalize as habits before
you can confidently write high quality software. This site introduces both
technical skills, like implementing and testing a program in Python, and
professional skills, like effective communication and time management.

As expected, a proactive programmer must know how to use development tools like
a text editor, a terminal window, and the Git version control system. With that
said, you are probably wondering how effective communication skills and time
management support the practice of proactive programming! The experience of many
proactive programmers suggests that the ability to communicate with both team
members and an instructor are skills that are as valuable as knowing how to
install Python on your laptop.

Why is that the case? As an example, it is hard to "act[s] in anticipation of
future problems, needs, or changes"[^1] if you are always running behind
schedule on your programming projects. It also hard to be responsible to
yourself, your team members, and the people who use the software you create if
you can't communicate effectively to learn, for instance, what software you need
to build, who will design and create the different system components, and how
you should create your own parts of the system.

Let's dive into some of the technical skills that you will need as a proactive
programmer!

[^1]: Don't forget to review Merriam-Webster for the definition of
  "[proactive](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/proactive)" and its
  examples of sentences using the word. How do you think that, for instance,
  good time management skills help a programmer become more proactive?
