# Numerical Data

## Project Goals

This assignment invites you to implement a program that features multiple
algorithms for performing primality testing. You will implement two algorithms
that conduct a search to determine whether or not the number input to the
program is prime. The exhaustive search algorithm will examine all possible
elements of a search space while, in contrast, the efficient one will use extra
conditional logic to restrict the search space. In addition to adding source
code the provided Python files, you will conduct an experiment to determine
which algorithm is the fastest and estimate by how much it is faster. As you
enhance your [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/) and explore the
experimental evaluation of algorithms, you will continue to program with tools
such as VS Code and a terminal window and the Python programming language and
the Poetry package manager.

## Project Access

If you are a student enrolled in a Computer Science class at Allegheny College,
you can access this assignment by clicking the link provided to you in Discord.
Once you click this link it will create a GitHub repository that you can clone
to your computer by following the general-purpose instructions in the
description of the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/). Specifically, you
will need to use the `git clone` command to download the project from GitHub to
your computer. Now you are ready to add source code and documentation to the
project!

## Expected Output

## Project Reflection

Once you have finished all of the previous technical tasks, you can use a text
editor to answer all of the questions in the `writing/reflection.md` file. Since
this is a source code survey, you should provide output from running each of the
provided Python programs on your own laptop and then explain how the program's
source code produced that output. A specific goal for this project is to ensure
that you understand how Python programs should correctly use modular arithmetic
and floating point numbers to achieve a practical goal.

## Project Assessment

Since this project is source code survey, it is aligned with the **remembering**
and **understanding** levels of [Bloom's
taxonomy](proactive-learning/blooms-taxonomy/). You can learn more about how a
proactive programming expert will assess your work by examining the [assessment
strategy](/proactive-learning/assessment-strategy/). From the start to the end
of this project you may make an unlimited number of reattempts at submitting
source code and technical writing that meet the project's specification.

## Seeking Assistance

Emerging proactive programmers who have questions about this project are invited
to ask them in either the [GitHub discussions
forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions)
or the [Proactive Programmers Discord server](https://discord.gg/kjah8MFYbR).
Before you ask your question, please read the advice concerning how to best
participate in the [Proactive Programmers
community](https://proactiveprogrammers.com/proactive-community/community-connections/).
If you find a mistake in this project, please describe it and propose a solution
by creating an issue in the [GitHub Issue
Tracker](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/issues).
