# Introduction

[//]: # (Quote about the benefits of documentation)

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-documentation.md"

[//]: # (Transition to the next section about the need for community)

Since programming is difficult, it is common to become stuck and find that you
need help to solve your current technical challenge. Even though getting stuck
on a programming problem can be frustrating, the good news is that there are
significant number of great resources that can help you to solve technical
problems. In addition to sites like [Stack
Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/), there are many informative blog posts
written by experts who took to heart [Victoria Drake](https://victoria.dev/)'s
reminder that "[t]he secret to good documentation is to write it while you're
writing the code. You are your first audience. Explain what you're doing to
yourself." This means that the community of proactive programmers can, as a
"second audience", benefit from the wide variety of technical posts on personal
and company blogs. Here is an exciting thought to consider: after investing the
time to become a proactive programmer you will have the knowledge and skills
needed to deploy your own web site featuring articles in which you share what
you learned when you overcame a tricky technical challenge!

The remainder of this section overviews a few of the external resources that can
help a proactive programmer grow in their technical and professional skills. It
is worth noting that the lists in the following sections are only starting
points for your technical and professional growth. If you have some ideas for
improving these lists of resources you can share them in the [GitHub Issue
Tracker](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/issues)
or in the [GitHub Discussions
Forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions)!
