# Introduction

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-technical-skills.md"

To become a proactive programmer you need to become comfortable with and then a
master of a wide variety of technical skills that include using a text editor
and a terminal window and testing and debugging your program. When faced with an
array of technical skills that you need to master, it is worth asking: how do I
get good at all of these skills? While there are a lot of skills that you will
should develop as you emerge as a proactive programmer, it is exciting to report
that there are some proven strategies towards mastering them!

Have you ever heard that, to master a skill, you primarily need to devote 10,000
hours to practicing it? While practice is, in fact, really important, it seems
that the "10,000 hours rule" in a
[misinterpretation](https://www.goodlifeproject.com/podcast/anders-ericsson/) of
the research of K. Anders Ericsson. So, what does work? Well, [Greg
Wilson](https://third-bit.com/) writes in [*Teaching Tech
Together*](https://teachtogether.tech/en/index.html) that "what actually works
is doing similar but subtly different things, paying attention to what works and
what doesn't, and then changing behavior in response to that feedback to get
cumulatively better." Specifically, to master the technical skills introduced on
this site you need to participate in deliberate practice that "requires both a
clear performance goal and immediate informative feedback".[^1] Here is a
summary from [Teaching Tech Together](https://teachtogether.tech/en/index.html)
of the stages you should take when using deliberate practice to learn these
technical skills:

- **Act on feedback from others**: While attempting to install, configure, and
  use a program on your laptop (e.g., [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
  or [Python](https://www.python.org/)), ask a more established programmer who
  has already successfully accomplished this task what they think of your setup
  and the approach that you took to create it. Next, listen carefully to their
  feedback and then attempt to improve your setup as needed, asking for
  clarification as appropriate.

- **Give feedback on the work of others**: As you are installing, configuring,
  and learning how to use a software tool needed for proactive programming,
  offer constructive feedback to a peer who recently completed a similar step.
  Once you have shared your suggestions, ask both your peer and a more
  established programmer to evaluate the way in which you delivered the feedback
  and the quality of the feedback itself.

- **Give feedback to yourself**: After you have regularly practiced a technical
  skill, such as implementing and testing Python programs, take time to observe
  your use of this skill and develop a critique of your own approach. After
  identifying areas for improvement, make a list of SMART goals that will enable
  you to more effectively put a specific technical skill into practice, follow
  your plan, and work to continually to improve.[^2]

--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"

[^1]: See Merriam-Webster for the definition of [Teaching Tech
  Together](https://teachtogether.tech/en/index.html) for more details about how
  to effectively learn technical skills. What practical steps can you take to
  best ensure that you can master the technical skills of a proactive programmer?

[^2]: See the article called [How to write SMART
  goals](https://www.atlassian.com/blog/productivity/how-to-write-smart-goals)
  for an overview of how to create SMART goals that are specific, measurable,
    achievable, relevant, and time-bound. In your view, what are the benefits of
    ensuring that your goals fit into the SMART paradigm?
