# Using GatorGrader

[//]: # (Excerpted from docs on GatorGrade and GatorGrader)

## Introduction

The projects on this web site integrate the
[GatorGrader](https://github.com/GatorEducator/gatorgrader) tool so that an
emerging proactive programmer can receive rapid feedback in either a GitHub
Actions build or by running an assessment tool on their computer. Since each
project on this site overviews the checks that GatorGrader runs, the purpose of
this documentation is to explain how to run GatorGrader through the use of
[GatorGrade](https://github.com/GatorEducator/gatorgrade). To install the
GatorGrade program you need to, after first installing the most recent version
of Python, install the program called [Pipx](https://github.com/pypa/pipx).
This program will make it easy for you to install GatorGrade through the use of
the command `pipx install gatorgrade`. If you are in the home directory of a
specific project described on this site you can type the command `gatorgrade
--config config/gatorgrade.yml` to run all the automated assessments for the
project.

## Next Steps

Before you start to learn more about the professional skills of a proactive
programmer, make sure that you review the
[introduction](./introduction-technical-skills.md) to these technical skills.
Have you become comfortable with, for instance, acting on feedback from others,
giving feedback to your colleagues, and giving feedback to yourself? Make sure
that you continue to practice all of these technical skills, participating in
the [proactive
community](../../../proactive-community/community-connections/) by
sharing your ideas for improving this content and helping others to master each
software tool!
