# Containment Checks

## Project Goals

This engineering effort invites you to implement and use a program called
`containmentcheck` that conducts an experiment to evaluate the performance of
containment checking using the `in` operator for different types of data
containers like tuples and lists. When you run the completed version of the
`containmentcheck` program it will allow you to specify the size of the
container, the maximum value of the integer values stored in the container, the
type of data container, and whether or not the searching algorithm should look
for a value that does or does not exceed the maximum value in the list. If you
configure it correctly, the `containmentcheck` program will total and average
time for using the `in` operator for the automatically generated lists.
Specifically, `containmentcheck` will use the
[timeit](https://docs.python.org/3/library/timeit.html) package to measure the
performance of the `in` operator for different data containers, following one
of the approaches outlined in the article called [measure execution time with
timeit in Python](https://note.nkmk.me/en/python-timeit-measure/). As you
complete this engineering effort you will experimentally evaluate the claims
in the following articles about the best way to determine if a specific value
exists inside of a data container.

- [Membership testing](https://switowski.com/blog/membership-testing)
- [Python speed](https://wiki.python.org/moin/PythonSpeed)
- [Using key in list to check if key is contained in list](https://docs.quantifiedcode.com/python-anti-patterns/performance/using_key_in_list_to_check_if_key_is_contained_in_a_list.html)
- [Why is a set faster than a list in Python?](https://www.quora.com/Why-is-a-set-faster-than-a-list-in-Python)

## Project Access

If you are a student enrolled in a Computer Science class at Allegheny College,
you can access this assignment by clicking the link provided to you in Discord.
Once you click this link it will create a GitHub repository that you can clone
to your computer by following the general-purpose instructions in the
description of the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/). Specifically, you
will need to use the `git clone` command to download the project from GitHub to
your computer. Now you are ready to add source code and documentation to the
project!

## Expected Output

This project invites you to implement a Python program, called
`containmentcheck`, that features different ways search through a text file to
find records that match the parameter values specified on the command-line.
Specifically, the records of data in the specified input file should correspond
to information about a specific person, organized in the following fashion. It
is worth noting that all of the data in the input file is automatically
generated by a tool that uses the [Faker](https://github.com/joke2k/faker)
library and is thus synthetic in nature.

```
Cindy Burns,Dominican Republic,(102)481-3875,"Pharmacist, hospital",rtorres@example.org
Jason Bailey,Falkland Islands (Malvinas),+1-552-912-2326,Leisure centre manager,daniel51@example.com
Andrew Johnson,Portugal,733-554-3949,"Engineer, site",michael94@example.com
Carol Poole,Isle of Man,365.529.7270,Pensions consultant,piercebrenda@example.com
Riley Gonzalez,Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,7752827092,Materials engineer,osborneeric@example.net
```

After you finish a correct implementation of all the `containmentcheck`'s
features you can run it with the command `poetry run containmentcheck
--search-term tylera --attribute email --input-file input/people.txt
--output-file output/people.txt` and see that it produces output like the
following. It is important to note that since this program is deterministic and
not dependent on the performance characteristics of your computer, your
implementation of the program should produce exactly the following output. This
specific invocation of the program looks for people with records that have an
email address containing the search term `tylera`. After inputting the 50,000
records from the file called `input/people.txt` and converting each one to an
object-oriented format, the program searches and ultimately determines that
there are four people in the input file that match the search parameters.

```
🧮 Reading in the data from the specified file input/people.txt

🚀 Parsing the data file and transforming it into people objects

🕵  Searching for the people with an email that matches the search term
'tylera'

✨ Here are the matching people:

- Debra Williams is a Retail merchandiser who lives in Guadeloupe. You can
call this person at 407-035-6634 and email them at tyleranderson@example.com
- Christopher Lin is a Embryologist, clinical who lives in United Kingdom.
You can call this person at (515)580-8082x35082 and email them at
tyleranthony@example.com
- William Valdez is a Air broker who lives in Algeria. You can call this
person at 408.592.1306 and email them at tylerashley@example.net
- Joshua Chaney is a Water engineer who lives in San Marino. You can call
this person at 310.624.7694x64127 and email them at tylerallen@example.net

✨ Saving the matching people to the file output/people.txt
```

Finally, don't forget that you can display `containmentcheck`'s help menu and
learn more about its features by typing `poetry run containmentcheck --help` to
show the following output. It is worth noting that all of the parameters to the
`containmentcheck` program, excepting those connected to completion of
command-line arguments or the help menu, are required. This means that the
`containmentcheck` will produce an error if you do not specify the four required
parameters respectively related to the search term, the "attribute" of a person
stored in a row of data (e.g., the email address or the country), and both the
input file and the output file that will save the search results.

```
Usage: containmentcheck [OPTIONS]

  Input data about a person and then analyze and save it.

Options:
  --search-term TEXT    [required]
  --attribute TEXT      [required]
  --input-file PATH     [required]
  --output-file PATH    [required]
  --install-completion  Install completion for the current shell.
  --show-completion     Show completion for the current shell, to copy it
                        or customize the installation.

  --help                Show this message and exit.
```

Please note that the provided source code does not contain all of the
functionality to produce the output displayed in this section. As the next
section explains, you should add the features needed to ensure that
`containmentcheck` produces the expected output! Although you don't need to add
any functionality to the `person` module, you will need to address all of the
`TODO` markers in the `process` and `main` modules.

???+ note

    Don't forget that if you want to run the `containmentcheck` you must use your
    terminal window to first go into the GitHub repository containing this
    project and then go into the `containmentcheck/` directory that contains the
    project's source code. Finally, remember that before running the program you
    must run `poetry install` to add its dependencies, such as Pytest for
    automated testing and Rich for colorful output!

## Adding Functionality

If you study the file `containmentcheck/containmentcheck/process.py` you will see
that it has many `TODO` markers that designate the sorting algorithms that you
must implement so as to ensure that `containmentcheck` will produce correct
output. For instance, you will need to implement most of the steps in the `def
extract_person_data(data: str) -> List[person.Person]` function that takes as
input all of the text in the input CSV file and produces as output a `List` of
instances of the `Person` class in the `person` module. You will also need to
implement the both functions that determine if a specific instance of `Person`
matches the criteria specified on the program's command-line interface and those
that perform the file input and output. Finally, you are invited to implement
the functions in the `main` module that call the functions in `process`. Once
you complete a task associated with a `TODO` marker, make sure that you delete
it and revise the prompt associated with the marker into a meaningful comment.

## Running Checks

If you study the source code in the `pyproject.toml` file you will see that
it includes the following section that specifies different executable tasks:

```toml
[tool.taskipy.tasks]
black = { cmd = "black containmentcheck --check", help = "Run the black checks for source code format" }
flake8 = { cmd = "flake8 containmentcheck", help = "Run the flake8 checks for source code documentation" }
mypy = { cmd = "poetry run mypy containmentcheck", help = "Run the mypy type checker for potential type errors" }
pydocstyle = { cmd = "pydocstyle containmentcheck tests", help = "Run the pydocstyle checks for source code documentation" }
pylint = { cmd = "pylint containmentcheck", help = "Run the pylint checks for source code documentation" }
all = "task black && task flake8 && task pydocstyle && task pylint && task mypy"
lint = "task black && task flake8 && task pydocstyle && task pylint"
```

This section makes it easy to run commands like `poetry run task lint` to
automatically run all of the linters designed to check the Python source code in
your program and its test suite. You can also use the command `poetry run task
black` to confirm that your source code adheres to the industry-standard format
defined by the `black` tool. If it does not adhere to the standard then you can
run the command `poetry run black containmentcheck` and it will automatically
reformat the source code. Along with running tasks like `poetry run task lint`,
you can leverage the relevant instructions in the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/) to enter into a Docker
container and run the command `gradle grade` to check your work. If `gradle
grade` shows that all checks pass, you will know that you made progress towards
correctly implementing and writing about `containmentcheck`.

???+ note

    Don't forget that when you commit source code or technical writing to your
    GitHub repository for this project, it will trigger the run of a GitHub
    Actions workflow. If you are a student at Allegheny College, then running
    this workflow consumes build minutes for the course's organization! As such,
    you should only commit to your repository once you have made substantive
    changes to your project and you are ready to confirm its correctness. Before
    you commit to your repository, you can still run checks on your own computer
    by either using Poetry or Docker and GatorGrader.

## Project Reflection

Once you have finished both of the previous technical tasks, you can use a text
editor to answer all of the questions in the `writing/reflection.md` file. For
instance, you should provide the output of the Python program in several fenced
code blocks, explain the meaning of the Python source code segments that you
implemented, and answer all of the other questions about your experiences in
completing this project. A specific goal for this project's reflection is to
ensure that you can explain Python source code written in an object-oriented
fashion and discuss the trade-offs associated with this approach. For instance,
you should understand how the following constructor, implemented in the
`__init__` function, is used to create a new instance of the `Person` class.

```python
def __init__(
    self, name: str, country: str, phone_number: str, job: str, email: str
) -> None:
    """Define the constructor for a person."""
    self.name = name
    self.country = country
    self.phone_number = phone_number
    self.job = job
    self.email = email
```

## Project Assessment

Since this project is an engineering effort, it is aligned with the
**evaluating** and **creating** levels of [Bloom's
taxonomy](proactive-learning/blooms-taxonomy/). You can learn more about how a
proactive programming expert will assess your work by examining the [assessment
strategy](/proactive-learning/assessment-strategy/). From the start to the end
of this project you may make an unlimited number of reattempts at submitting
source code and technical writing that meet all aspects of the project's
specification.

## Seeking Assistance

Emerging proactive programmers who have questions about this project are invited
to ask them in either the [GitHub discussions
forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions)
or the [Proactive Programmers Discord server](https://discord.gg/kjah8MFYbR).
Before you ask your question, please read the advice concerning how to best
participate in the [Proactive Programmers
community](https://proactiveprogrammers.com/proactive-community/community-connections/).
If you find a mistake in this project, please describe it and propose a solution
by creating an issue in the [GitHub Issue
Tracker](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/issues).
