---
tags:
  - Conditional Logic
  - Iteration Constructs
  - Functions
  - Data Types
  - Performance
---

![Intersection Algorithms](/img/Pro-Data-Abstraction-Intersection-Algorithms.svg){loading=lazy}

# Intersection Algorithms

## Project Goals

This assignment invites you to implement a program that features multiple
algorithms for computing the intersection between a data container.
Specifically, you will implement and experimentally evaluate the following
intersection algorithms: (i) a `list`-based approach with a single `for` loop,
(ii) a `list`-based approach with a double `for` loop, (iii) a `tuple`-based
approach with a single `for` loop, and (iv) a `tuple`-based approach with a
double `for` loop. In addition to adding source code to the provided Python
files, you will conduct an experiment to determine which algorithm is the
fastest and estimate by how much it is faster. As you enhance your [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/) and explore the
experimental evaluation of algorithms, you will continue to program with tools
such as VS Code and a terminal window and the Python programming language and
the Poetry package manager.

## Project Access

If you are a student enrolled in a Computer Science class at Allegheny College,
you can access this assignment by clicking the link provided to you in Discord.
Once you click this link it will create a GitHub repository that you can clone
to your computer by following the general-purpose instructions in the
description of the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/). Specifically, you
will need to use the `git clone` command to download the project from GitHub to
your computer. Now you are ready to add source code and documentation to the
project!

## Expected Output

This project invites you to implement a data container intersection problem
called `intersection`. After you finish a correct implementation of all the
program's features, running it with the command `poetry run intersection
--number 10000 --maximum 25 --profile --approach ListDouble` will produce output
like the following. This output shows that it took approximately `2.210` seconds
to compute the intersection of two `list`s that each contain `10,000` randomly
generated values with the maximum value in each `list` being `25`. Importantly,
this invocation of the `intersection` program configures it to run the
`ListDouble` algorithm that uses a doubly-nested `for` loop to compute the
intersection of the `list`s. Did you notice that this program produces profiling
data about how long it took to run the `intersection` program with the
`ListDouble` algorithm? This is because of the fact that it uses the
[Pyinstrument](https://github.com/joerick/pyinstrument) package to collect
execution traces and efficiency information about the program.

```
ðŸ”¬ Here's profiling data from computing an intersection with random data
containers of 10000!

  _     ._   __/__   _ _  _  _ _/_   Recorded: 14:01:19  Samples:  2207
 /_//_/// /_\ / //_// / //_'/ //     Duration: 2.211     CPU time: 2.203
/   _/                      v4.0.3

Program: intersection --number 10000 --maximum 25 --profile --approach ListDouble

2.210 intersection  intersection/main.py:99
â””â”€ 2.210 compute_intersection_list_double  intersection/main.py:53
   â”œâ”€ 2.051 [self]
   â””â”€ 0.159 list.append  <built-in>:0
         [2 frames hidden]  <built-in>
```

It is worth noting that you do not have to run `intersection` in the `profile`
mode that uses Pyinstrument. For instance, running the program with `poetry run
intersection --number 10 --maximum 25 --display --approach ListDouble` would run
the program with the `ListDouble` algorithm and perform the same computation
without collecting the performance data. When run with this command,
`intersection` would produce output like the following. Note that when the
program is run with the `--display` flag and without the `--profile` flag it
shows the two input data containers and their computed intersection &mdash;
without reporting any details about the efficiency of the algorithm. This mode
is ideal when you want to confirm that your implementation of `intersection` is
perform the correct computation and less useful when you are running experiments
to study the program's performance.

```
âœ¨ Here are the details about the intersection computation!

Performed intersection with:
---> the first data container: [22, 10, 21, 11, 2, 7, 4, 16, 22, 23]
---> the second data container: [16, 17, 23, 24, 12, 4, 21, 1, 18, 19]
Computed the intersection as the data container: [21, 4, 16, 23]
```

Don't forget that you can display `intersection`'s help menu and learn more
about its features by typing `poetry run intersection --help` to display the
following:

```
Usage: intersection [OPTIONS]

  Compute the intersection of data containers.

Options:
  --number INTEGER                [default: 5]
  --maximum INTEGER               [default: 25]
  --profile / --no-profile        [default: False]
  --display / --no-display        [default: False]
  --approach [ListSingle|TupleSingle|ListDouble|TupleDouble]
                                  [default: TupleSingle]
  --install-completion            Install completion for the current
                                  shell.

  --show-completion               Show completion for the current shell,
                                  to copy it or customize the
                                  installation.

  --help                          Show this message and exit.
```

Please note that the provided source code does not contain all of the
functionality to produce the output displayed in this section. As explained in
the next section, you are invited to add the features needed to ensure that
`intersection` produces the expected output!

???+ note

    Don't forget that if you want to run the `intersection` program you must use
    your terminal window to first go into the GitHub repository containing this
    project and then go into the `intersection` directory that contains the
    project's source code. Finally, remember that before running the program you
    must run `poetry install` to add its dependencies, such as Pyinstrument,
    Pytest, and Rich.

## Adding Functionality

If you study the file `intersection/intersection/main.py` you will see that it
has many `TODO` markers that designate the parts of the program that you need to
implement before `intersection` will produce correct output. To ensure that the
program works correctly, you must implement all of these functions before you
start to run the experiments.

- `def generate_random_container(size: int, maximum: int, make_tuple: bool = False) -> Union[List[int], Tuple[int, ...]]`
- `def compute_intersection_list_double(input_one: List[Any], input_two: List[Any]) -> List[Any]`
- `def compute_intersection_list_single(input_one: List[Any], input_two: List[Any]) -> List[Any]`

The function called `generate_random_container` should automatically create
either a `tuple` or a `list` of the specified `size` and only containing values
that are less than or equal to the `maximum`. The function called
`compute_intersection_list_single` should follow the implementation strategy of
its counterpart function called `compute_intersection_tuple_single` while still
using the functions appropriate for the `list` structured type. Moreover, the
`compute_intersection_list_double` should follow the implementation of
`compute_intersection_tuple_double` except for the fact that it should populate
an `list` through the use of a doubly-nested `for` loop. As a reference, here is
the source code for the `compute_intersection_tuple_single` function:

```python linenums="1"
def compute_intersection_tuple_single(
    input_one: Tuple[Any, ...], input_two: Tuple[Any, ...]
) -> Tuple[Any, ...]:
    """Compute the intersection of two provided tuples."""
    result: Tuple[Any, ...] = ()
    for element in input_one:
        if element in input_two:
            result += (element,)
    return result
```

According to the type signature of this function on lines `1` and `2`, the
`compute_intersection_tuple_single` function accepts as input two `tuples` that
can contain `Any` type of data and be of an arbitrary size. Lines `6` through
`8` of this function show that it uses the combination of a `for` loop and an
`if` statement to compute the intersection of the `tuple`s called `input_one`
and `input_two`. After finding those elements that these `tuple`s contain in
common, `compute_intersection_tuple_single` returns the `result` on line `9`.
Since this function processes `tuple`s it is possible that the intersection of
the input parameters will be a `result` that contains a value more than once. It
is also worth noting that, since the `tuple` structured type is immutable, this
function uses the `+=` operator on line `8` to create a new `tuple` each time
that it adds data to the `result` variable. You will empirically study the
efficiency of this approach!

After finishing your implementation of `intersection` you should conduct an
experiment to evaluate the efficiency of the different algorithms that it
provides. You should refer to the `writing/reflection.md` file for more details
about the experiment that you should conduct and how you must configure the
`intersection` program to collect data. Ultimately, you need to answer the
following three research questions:

- Is the intersection of two data containers faster with a `list` or a `tuple`?
- Is the intersection of two data containers faster with a double or single `for` loop?
- Overall, what is the fastest approach for computing the intersection of two
  data containers?

## Running Checks

If you study the source code in the `pyproject.toml` file you will see that it
includes the following section that specifies different executable tasks like
`lint`. If you are in the `intersection` directory that contains the
`pyproject.toml` file and the `poetry.lock` file, the tasks in this section
make it easy to run commands like `poetry run task lint` to automatically run
all of the linters designed to check the Python source code in your program and
its test suite. You can also use the command `poetry run task black` to confirm
that your source code adheres to the industry-standard format defined by the
`black` tool. If it does not adhere to the standard then you can run the
command `poetry run task fixformat` and it will automatically reformat the
source code. Make sure to examine the `pyproject.toml` file for other convenient
tasks that you can use to both check and improve your project!

Along with running tasks like `poetry run task lint`, you can leverage the
relevant instructions in the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/) to run the command
`gatorgrade --config config/gatorgrade.yml` to check your work. If your work
meets the baseline requirements and adheres to the best practices that proactive
programmers adopt you will see that all the checks pass when you run
`gatorgrade`. You can study the `config/gatorgrade.yml` file in your repository
to learn how the :material-github:
[GatorGrade](https://github.com/GatorEducator/gatorgrade) program runs
:material-github: [GatorGrader](https://github.com/GatorEducator/gatorgrader) to
automatically check your program and technical writing. If your program has all
of the anticipated functionality, you can run the command `poetry run task test`
and see that the test suite produces output like the following. Can you add
comments to the test suite to explain how the test cases work?

```text
collected 4 items

tests/test_intersection.py .......
```

This project comes with other tasks that you can run once you have used Poetry
to install all of the dependencies. For instance, if you find that your Python
source code is not in adherence with the required formatting rules, you can run
`poetry run task black` to automatically return it to the correct format! You
can also run commands like `poetry run task mypy` to check the program's use of
data types and `poetry run task pylint` to ensure that your source code adheres
to other established programming conventions. You can use these built-in tasks
to understand and improve your code's quality!

???+ note

    Don't forget that when you commit source code or technical writing to your
    GitHub repository for this project, it will trigger the run of a GitHub
    Actions workflow. If you are a student at Allegheny College, then running
    this workflow consumes build minutes for the course's organization! As such,
    you should only commit to your repository once you have made substantive
    changes to your project and you are ready to confirm its correctness. Before
    you commit to your GitHub repository, you can still run checks on your own
    computer by either using Poetry and GatorGrader.

## Project Reflection

Once you have finished both of the previous technical tasks, you can use a text
editor to answer all of the questions in the `writing/reflection.md` file. For
instance, you should provide the output of the Python program in a fenced code
block, explain the meaning of the Python source code segments that you
implemented, and answer all of the other questions about your experiences in
completing this project. A specific goal of the reflection for this project is
to evaluate the efficiency of the different algorithms and data containers
implemented as part of the `intersection` program. When you are writing your
performance evaluation make sure that you both explain what performance trends
are evident and why you think the algorithms yield these trends. Finally, you
should reflect on how the experimental evaluation of a program's performance is
more nuanced than you might have initially expected before starting to work on
this project.

## Project Assessment

Since this project is an engineering effort, it is aligned with the
**evaluating** and **creating** levels of [Bloom's
taxonomy](proactive-learning/blooms-taxonomy/). You can learn more about how a
proactive programming expert will assess your work by examining the [assessment
strategy](/proactive-learning/assessment-strategy/). From the start to the end
of this project you may make an unlimited number of reattempts at submitting
source code and technical writing that meet all aspects of the project's
specification.

???+ note

    Before you finish all of the required deliverables required by this project is
    worth pausing to remember that the instructor will give advance feedback to
    any learner who requests it through GitHub and Discord at least 24 hours
    before the project's due date! Seriously, did you catch that? This policy
    means that you can have a thorough understanding of ways to improve your
    project **before** its final assessment! To learn more about this
    opportunity, please read the [assessment
    strategy](../../../proactive-learning/assessment-strategy/) for this site.

## Seeking Assistance

Emerging proactive programmers who have questions about this project are invited
to ask them in either the [GitHub discussions
forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions)
or the [Proactive Programmers Discord server](https://discord.gg/kjah8MFYbR).
Before you ask your question, please read the advice concerning how to best
participate in the [Proactive Programmers
community](https://proactiveprogrammers.com/proactive-community/community-connections/).
If you find a mistake in this project, please describe it and propose a solution
by creating an issue in the [GitHub Issue
Tracker](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/issues).
