# Object Processing

## Project Goals

This engineering effort invites you to implement and use a program called
`objectprocessor` searches a text file for rows of data that match a specific
pattern. The `objectprocessor` works by reading in a text file in comma-separate
value (CSV) format that contains information about a person on each row of the
file. Next, the program converts each row of data into an instance of the
`Person` class, stores that instance inside of a `list`, and then performs one
of several configurable searches for instances of `Person` that match the
constraints specified on the command-line of the `objectprocessor`. Finally, the
program will save all of the matching rows of data in the specified file. In
addition to implementing the functions that perform the file input and output
and the searching for matching `Person`s in the `list`, you will use a
comprehensive command-line interface, implemented with
[Typer](https://typer.tiangolo.com/), that allows you to easily to confirm the
files for input and output and the terms for the query for matching people.

## Project Access

If you are a student enrolled in a Computer Science class at Allegheny College,
you can access this assignment by clicking the link provided to you in Discord.
Once you click this link it will create a GitHub repository that you can clone
to your computer by following the general-purpose instructions in the
description of the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/). Specifically, you
will need to use the `git clone` command to download the project from GitHub to
your computer. Now you are ready to add source code and documentation to the
project!

## Expected Output

This project invites you to implement a Python program, called
`objectprocessor`, that features different ways search through a text file to
find records that match the parameter values specified on the command-line.
Specifically, the records of data in the specified input file should correspond
to information about a specific person, organized in the following fashion. It
is worth noting that all of the data in the input file is automatically
generated by a tool that uses the [Faker](https://github.com/joke2k/faker)
library and is thus synthetic in nature.

```
Cindy Burns,Dominican Republic,(102)481-3875,"Pharmacist, hospital",rtorres@example.org
Jason Bailey,Falkland Islands (Malvinas),+1-552-912-2326,Leisure centre manager,daniel51@example.com
Andrew Johnson,Portugal,733-554-3949,"Engineer, site",michael94@example.com
Carol Poole,Isle of Man,365.529.7270,Pensions consultant,piercebrenda@example.com
Riley Gonzalez,Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,7752827092,Materials engineer,osborneeric@example.net
```

After you finish a correct implementation of all the `objectprocessor`'s
features you can run it with the command `poetry run objectprocessor
--search-term tylera --attribute email --input-file input/people.txt
--output-file output/people.txt` and see that it produces output like the
following. It is important to note that since this program is deterministic and
not dependent on the performance characteristics of your computer, your
implementation of the program should produce exactly the following output. This
specific invocation of the program looks for people with records that have an
email address containing the search term `tylera`. After inputting the 50,000
records from the file called `input/people.txt` and converting each one to an
object-oriented format, the program searches and ultimately determines that
there are four people in the input file that match the search parameters.

```
🧮 Reading in the data from the specified file input/people.txt

🚀 Parsing the data file and transforming it into people objects

🕵  Searching for the people with an email that matches the search term
'tylera'

✨ Here are the matching people:

- Debra Williams is a Retail merchandiser who lives in Guadeloupe. You can
call this person at 407-035-6634 and email them at tyleranderson@example.com
- Christopher Lin is a Embryologist, clinical who lives in United Kingdom.
You can call this person at (515)580-8082x35082 and email them at
tyleranthony@example.com
- William Valdez is a Air broker who lives in Algeria. You can call this
person at 408.592.1306 and email them at tylerashley@example.net
- Joshua Chaney is a Water engineer who lives in San Marino. You can call
this person at 310.624.7694x64127 and email them at tylerallen@example.net

✨ Saving the matching people to the file output/people.txt
```

Finally, don't forget that you can display `objectprocessor`'s help menu and
learn more about its features by typing `poetry run objectprocessor --help` to
show the following output. It is worth noting that all of the parameters to the
`objectprocessor` program, excepting those connected to completion of
command-line arguments or the help menu, are required. This means that the
`objectprocessor` will produce an error if you do not specify the four required
parameters respectively related to the search term, the "attribute" of a person
stored in a row of data (e.g., the email address or the country), and the input
and output files.

```
Usage: objectprocessor [OPTIONS]

  Input data about a person and then analyze and save it.

Options:
  --search-term TEXT    [required]
  --attribute TEXT      [required]
  --input-file PATH     [required]
  --output-file PATH    [required]
  --install-completion  Install completion for the current shell.
  --show-completion     Show completion for the current shell, to copy it
                        or customize the installation.

  --help                Show this message and exit.
```

Please note that the provided source code does not contain all of the
functionality to produce the output displayed in this section. As the next
section explains, you should add the features needed to ensure that
`objectprocessor` produces the expected output! Although you don't need to add
any functionality to the `person` module, you will need to address all of the
`TODO` markers in the `process` and `main` modules.

???+ note

    Don't forget that if you want to run the `objectprocessor` program you must use
    your terminal window to first go into the GitHub repository containing this
    project and then go into the `objectprocessor/` directory that contains the
    project's source code. Finally, remember that before running the program you
    must run `poetry install` to add its dependencies, such as Pytest for
    automated testing and Rich for colorful output!

## Adding Functionality

If you study the file `objectprocessor/objectprocessor/sorting.py` you will see that it
has many `TODO` markers that designate the sorting algorithms that you must
implement so as to ensure that `objectprocessor` will produce correct output. For
instance, you will need to provide an implementation of each sorting algorithm,
like bubble sort, that has a signature like `def bubble_sort(array: List[int])
-> List[int]`. You will also need to resolve all of the `TODO` markers in
`objectprocessor/objectprocessor/main.py` that involve calling the functions in
`objectprocessor/objectprocessor/experiment.py` to run each of the steps in a doubling
experiment. Once you complete a task associated with a `TODO` marker, make sure
that you delete it and revise the prompt associated with the marker into a
meaningful comment. Specifically, you must ensure that the `objectprocessor`
function in the `main` module calls the following
`run_sorting_algorithm_experiment_campaign` function.

```python
def run_sorting_algorithm_experiment_campaign(
    algorithm: str,
    starting_size: int,
    maximum_value: int,
    number_doubles: int,
) -> List[List[Union[int, Tuple[float, float, float]]]]:
    data_table = []
    while number_doubles > 0:
        random_list = generate_random_container(starting_size, maximum_value)
        performance_data = run_sorting_algorithm(algorithm, random_list)
        data_table_row = [
            starting_size,
            performance_data[0],
            performance_data[1],
            performance_data[2],
        ]
        data_table.append(data_table_row)
        number_doubles = number_doubles - 1
        starting_size = starting_size * 2
    return data_table
```

Notably, the `run_sorting_algorithm_experiment_campaign` function completes all
of the steps associated with running a specified sorting algorithm in a doubling
experiment. Upon completion, this function returns a `data_table` that contains
performance results for each round of the doubling experiment, as shown in the
previous section. After finishing your implementation of `objectprocessor`,
including the call to `run_sorting_algorithm_experiment_campaign` in `main`, you
should repeatedly run the program in different configurations to conduct an
experiment to evaluate the performance of each sorting algorithm that you
implemented. This process will result in a data table that summarizes the
results from a doubling experiment for each sorting algorithm. You can use the
data in the table to calculate the doubling ratio and then use it to predict the
likely worst-case time complexity of each sorting algorithm.

## Running Checks

If you study the source code in the `pyproject.toml` file you will see that
it includes the following section that specifies different executable tasks:

```toml
[tool.taskipy.tasks]
black = { cmd = "black objectprocessor tests --check", help = "Run the black checks for source code format" }
flake8 = { cmd = "flake8 objectprocessor tests", help = "Run the flake8 checks for source code documentation" }
mypy = { cmd = "poetry run mypy objectprocessor", help = "Run the mypy type checker for potential type errors" }
pydocstyle = { cmd = "pydocstyle objectprocessor tests", help = "Run the pydocstyle checks for source code documentation" }
pylint = { cmd = "pylint objectprocessor tests", help = "Run the pylint checks for source code documentation" }
test = { cmd = "pytest -x -s", help = "Run the pytest test suite" }
test-silent = { cmd = "pytest -x --show-capture=no", help = "Run the pytest test suite without showing output" }
all = "task black && task flake8 && task pydocstyle && task pylint && task mypy && task test"
lint = "task black && task flake8 && task pydocstyle && task pylint"
```

This section makes it easy to run commands like `poetry run task lint` to
automatically run all of the linters designed to check the Python source code in
your program and its test suite. You can also use the command `poetry run task
black` to confirm that your source code adheres to the industry-standard format
defined by the `black` tool. If it does not adhere to the standard then you can
run the command `poetry run black objectprocessor tests` and it will automatically
reformat the source code.

Along with running tasks like `poetry run task lint`, you can leverage the
relevant instructions in the [technical
skills](/proactive-skills/introduction-proactive-skills/) to enter into a Docker
container and run the command `gradle grade` to check your work. If `gradle
grade` shows that all checks pass, you will know that you made progress towards
correctly implementing and writing about `objectprocessor`.

This project comes with other tasks that you can run once you have used Poetry
to install all of the dependencies. For instance, if you find that your Python
source code is not in adherence with the required formatting rules, you can run
`poetry run task black` to automatically return it to the correct format! You
can also run commands like `poetry run task mypy` to check the program's use of
data types and `poetry run task pylint` to ensure that your source code adheres
to other established programming conventions. You can use these built-in tasks
to understand and improve your code's quality!

???+ note

    Don't forget that when you commit source code or technical writing to your
    GitHub repository for this project, it will trigger the run of a GitHub
    Actions workflow. If you are a student at Allegheny College, then running
    this workflow consumes build minutes for the course's organization! As such,
    you should only commit to your repository once you have made substantive
    changes to your project and you are ready to confirm its correctness. Before
    you commit to your repository, you can still run checks on your own computer
    by either using Poetry or Docker and GatorGrader.

## Project Reflection

Once you have finished both of the previous technical tasks, you can use a text
editor to answer all of the questions in the `writing/reflection.md` file. For
instance, you should provide the output of the Python program in a fenced code
block, explain the meaning of the Python source code segments that you
implemented, and answer all of the other questions about your experiences in
completing this project. A specific goal of the reflection for this project is
to ensure that you can clearly write research questions and an experiment
methodology for assessing the performance of a sorting algorithm. Once you have
finished addressing the prompts in the `writing/reflection.md` file that have
`TODO` makers given as reminders, make sure that you either delete the prompt or
carefully integrate a revised version of it into your writing.

## Project Assessment

Since this project is an engineering effort, it is aligned with the
**evaluating** and **creating** levels of [Bloom's
taxonomy](proactive-learning/blooms-taxonomy/). You can learn more about how a
proactive programming expert will assess your work by examining the [assessment
strategy](/proactive-learning/assessment-strategy/). From the start to the end
of this project you may make an unlimited number of reattempts at submitting
source code and technical writing that meet all aspects of the project's
specification.

## Seeking Assistance

Emerging proactive programmers who have questions about this project are invited
to ask them in either the [GitHub discussions
forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions)
or the [Proactive Programmers Discord server](https://discord.gg/kjah8MFYbR).
Before you ask your question, please read the advice concerning how to best
participate in the [Proactive Programmers
community](https://proactiveprogrammers.com/proactive-community/community-connections/).
If you find a mistake in this project, please describe it and propose a solution
by creating an issue in the [GitHub Issue
Tracker](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/issues).
