# Assignment Types

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-assignments.md"

The book called [*The Mythical
Man-Month*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month), written by
[Frederick P. Brooks, Jr.](https://www.cs.unc.edu/~brooks/), contains the
observation that "the magic of myth and legend has come true in our time. One
types the correct incantation on a keyboard, and a display screen comes to life,
showing things that never were nor could be." Wow, that makes programming sound
really exciting! And, it really is as enervating as Frederick P. Brooks, Jr.
makes it out to be. With that said, it can be overwhelming &mdash; and even
counter-productive &mdash; for an emerging proactive programmer to start their
journey by aiming to complete a useful software tool.

This site teaches proactive programming through three different types of
programming projects, each of which is connected to two of the levels in
[Bloom's Taxonomy](bloms-taxonomy.md) and therefore designed to develop your
programming knowledge and skills in a systematic and scaffolded fashion.

- **Source Code Surveys** connect to the **remember** and **understanding**
  levels of Bloom's taxonomy and invite learners to build a basic understanding
  of the building blocks of programs. Aimed at helping you to remember and
  understand how programming language constructs and a program's functions work,
  these projects ask you to run a program, observe its output, and describe its
  source source through technical writing.

- **Programming Projects** connect to the **applying** and **analyzing** levels
  of Bloom's taxonomy and encourage learners to complete programming tasks
  designed to ensure that they can effectively build a program by comparing and
  contrasting different solutions and picking the best one for a given problem.

- **Engineering Efforts** connect to the **evaluating** and **creating** levels
  of Bloom's taxonomy by asking learners to design, implement, test, and
  document programs that innovatively solve a problem. These projects help you
  to hone the skills of proposing, creating, assessing, and improving a complete
  software product.

Okay, sometimes the lines blur between these three types of assignments! With
that said, it should be clear that a source code survey is very different than
an engineering effort in that the former requires a learner to run a program and
observe its output while the later asks a person to create and evaluate a
complete program.

It's also worth noting that, for this purposes of this site's projects, a
programming project normally involves the implementation and testing of fewer
(and often less complex) source code lines than the program created as part of
an engineering effort. Since projects in the engineering effort category focus
on the creation and evaluation of programs, they also call for learners to
complete technical writing tasks that are more thorough than those that are a
part of either a programming project or an source code survey.

Still a little confused? Unconvinced that this focus on proactive learning is
important? Don't check out until you complete some projects in fields like [data
abstraction](data-abstraction/introduction-data-abstraction.md) and [discrete
structures](discrete-structures/introduction-discrete-structures.md)! Also,
don't forget: if you have some ideas for improve this content you can share them
in the [GitHub Issue
Tracker](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/issues)
or in the [GitHub Discussions
Forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions).
