# Introduction

[//]: # (Quote from Herb Simon on learning by doing)

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-learning.md"

[Herb Simon](https://www.cmu.edu/50/founder-stories/story-simon.html) is quoted
in [*Solving a Teaching
Problem*](https://www.cmu.edu/teaching/solveproblem/strat-cantapply/cantapply-01.html)
as saying that "learning results from what the student does and thinks and only
from what the student does and thinks. The teacher can advance learning only by
influencing what the student does to learn." This means that if you want to
learn how to become a proactive programmer then you must take on challenging
programming tasks! This site's projects site will help you to gain the knowledge
and skills of proactive programming as you "learn by doing".

How challenging should the projects be? How many projects do you need to
complete to learn to program? Although it is difficult to precisely answer these
questions for each person, it is fair to say that learning to program involves a
significant amount of failure. In fact, studies of machine learning algorithms
that learned to complete complex tasks suggest that they learned better when
they failed in their efforts about 15% of the time.[^1] Even though you are not
an algorithm, it is worth bearing in mind that failure is a natural &mdash; and
even beneficial &mdash; part of becoming a proactive programmer!

Yet, how much failure is too much? [Michael
Hilton](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~mhilton/) likes to tell his students "it is okay
to experience failure as long as you are learning" and that you should contact
him "if you are failing and not learning". Since you might not be Michael's
student, you probably should not contact him if you face challenges! But, if you
have a detailed question about any of the projects on this site, you are invited
to post in the [GitHub Discussions
Forum](https://github.com/ProactiveProgrammers/www.proactiveprogrammers.com/discussions).
Or, if you want to have a quick discussion about a technical topic then you can
ask it in the [Allegheny College Computer Science
Discord Server](https://discord.gg/3AzphUqEBQ) (for Allegheny College students) or the
[Proactive Programmers Discord Server](https://discord.gg/kjah8MFYbR) (for all
learners).

Before you dive into the projects on this site, let's first consider how
different types of learning exhibit different levels of cognitive difficulty and
how the projects you complete will be assessed depending on your learning
context.

[^1]: Check out the paper [The Eighty Five Percent Rule for Optimal
  Learning](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-12552-4) that [Robert
  Wilson](https://psychology.arizona.edu/users/robert-wilson) published as the
  lead author. After reading this article, do you think that the behavior of
  machine learning algorithms can surface insights about human learning?
