![Placeholder](img/Square-Proactive-Programmers-Logo.svg){align=center}

# Welcome!

--8<-- "includes/admonitions/admonish-ethics.md"

As [Perdita Stevens](https://www.stevens-bradfield.com/~perdita/) points out in
[*How to Write Good
Programs*](https://www.cambridge.org/gb/academic/subjects/computer-science/computing-general-interest/how-write-good-programs-guide-students),
"ethical programming includes being honest about the extent to which you can be
confident that your program is good, and adhering to quality control processes
that ensure if a mistake has been made &mdash; everybody makes mistakes &mdash;
it is found and rectified before it causes harm." She also writes that an
ethical programmer should be "a decent human being"!

What should you do to ensure that you write source code and documentation in an
ethical fashion? How can you become a programmer who is an empathetic member of
a software engineering team? If you complete the projects on this site and adopt
the principles that it introduces you will have embarked on an adventure to
become a **proactive programmer** who "acts in anticipation of future problems,
needs, or changes".[^1]

As they ethically engineer an efficient and correct program that is properly
designed, documented, tested, and maintained, proactive programmers are
**responsible** to **themselves**, to the others in their **team**, and to the
**people** who rely on their software. Does this sounds challenging? It sure is!
Will you make mistakes along the way to emerging as a proactive programmer? Of
course! Are there many benefits to being a proactive programmer? Yes, there are!
If you want to learn more about the principles and practices of proactive
programming, you should study this site's description of proactive skills and
complete the projects in the fields of data abstraction and discrete structures.

Are you **nervous** about getting started or **afraid** that becoming a
proactive programmer will prove to be too overwhelming? Don't worry, you can
rely on the team of **programming experts** who have crafted activities that
will help you to hone your technical and professional skills. If you get stuck
on this adventure you will find a welcoming **community** of like-minded learners
who can answer your technical questions, make suggestions for improvement, and
relate to your struggles. Oh, remember how Perdita Stevens said that everyone
makes mistakes? That includes the creators of this site! Although we have worked
hard to ensure that all of the program source code and documentation are
correct, we welcome your **bug reports** and **feedback** about this platform.

*Okay, let's become proactive programmers so that we can put the PRO in
programmer!*

[^1]: See Merriam-Webster for the definition of
  "[proactive](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/proactive)" and
  examples of sentences using the word. What do you think are the
  characteristics of a proactive programmer?
